---
layout: post
title: "Sequencing coverage and breadth of coverage"
date:   2019-11-23 010:19:20
author: Renesh Bedre
description: "Advanced Bioinformatics"
permalink: blog/seqcov.html
comments: true
---

<p>
{% include  share.html %}
</p>

**<span style="color:#33a8ff">What is Sequencing coverage or depth and breadth of coverage?</span>**
- Sequencing coverage or depth (coverage and depth are used interchangeably) 
  determines the number of times sequenced nucleotide bases covered the target genome. 
  For example, if genome size is 100 Mbp and you have sequenced 5 M 
  reads of 100 bp size, then sequencing coverage at genome level would be 5X.
- The breadth of coverage refers to the percentage of genome bases 
  sequenced at a given sequencing depth. For example, if 95% of the 
  genome is covered by sequencing at a certain depth.

**<span style="color:#33a8ff">How to calculate sequencing coverage </span>** 
- Sequencing coverage is calculated based on the type of sequencing. For RNA-seq applications, coverage is
  calculated based on the transcriptome size and for genome sequencing applications, coverage is
  calculated based on the genome size
- Generally in RNA-seq experiments, the read depth (number of reads per sample) is used instead of coverage.
  High read depth is necessary to identify genes with low expressions. The typical read depth RNA-seq 
  experiment to study gene expression ranges from 5 to 25 M reads per sample. 
- Calculating sequencing coverage based on raw sequence reads will give you rough estimates as some of these raw reads may
  have contamination (adapter, primer, duplicates or low-quality bases) or may not map to genome. In such cases, you can consider 
  genome mapped data for estimating the coverage. 

```python
# We will use `bioinfokit` for merging different VCF files
# download and install bioinfokit (Tested on Linux, Mac, Windows) 
git clone https://github.com/reneshbedre/bioinfokit.git
cd bioinfokit
python3 setup.py install
```

```python
# you can use interactive python console, jupyter or python code
# I am using interactive python console (Python 3.6)
# go to a directory where fastq files are saved. Make sure fastq file is uncompressed.
# this will give sequencing coverage per sample
>>>from bioinfokit import analys
>>>analys.seqcov(file="fastq_file", gs="genome size in Mbp")
```

**<span style="color:#33a8ff">Recommended sequence coverage for sequencing applications</span>**

| Sequencing applications  | Recommended Coverage  |
|----|----|
| Whole genome sequencing (WGS) | 15X to 60X |
| Whole exome sequencing (WES) | 100X |
| RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) | 5 to 100 M reads per sample depending on target study |
| ChIP-Seq | 100X |

Source: Illumina and genohub

References:
- Sims D, Sudbery I, Ilott NE, Heger A, Ponting CP. Sequencing depth and 
  coverage: key considerations in genomic analyses. Nature Reviews Genetics. 2014 Feb;15(2):121-32. 


**<span style="color:#33a8ff">How to cite?</span>**

Bedre, R. Bioinformatics data analysis and visualization toolkit. GitHub repository, <a href="https://github.com/reneshbedre/bioinfokit">https://github.com/reneshbedre/bioinfokit</a>


<span style="color:#9e9696">If you have any questions, comments or recommendations, please email me at 
<b>reneshbe@gmail.com</b></span>

<span style="color:#9e9696"><i> Last updated: November 23, 2019</i> </span>

<p>
{% include  share.html %}
</p>